[Music]
right as if i'm on a plane right now i
would love nothing more than to be
jetting off to the islands to use a
telescope on the top
of a mountain but there's a pandemic on
and we're in lockdown
again here in the uk so we're still
going to use that telescope but we're
going to do it remotely
2020 style but in 2021 from the home
office
so part of a scientist's job is to get
data right without
data you can't do any analysis and you
can't draw any conclusions and you
can't do any science for me as an
astronomer or an astrophysicist
that data is observations i take with
telescopes so
observing the sky in my case galaxies
taking images or getting spectra but
we'll get to that in a minute
it is currently 6 p.m on
thursday the 7th of january is that what
day is i have no idea yeah thursday the
7th of january
and we are supposed to be observing
tonight tomorrow saturday
and sunday as well it is currently
raining in la palma in the canary
islands it's also raining here
as well but because it's raining it
means we can't open the telescope it's
also
really windy as well they've had gusts
of up to like 60 70 miles an hour
and so that means that we can't open the
dome on the telescope either to you know
give it the telescope the little hole
that it pokes through to see the sky
because you'd be exposing that million
dollar telescope that million dollar
piece of kit
to the elements and obviously if it's
raining it's also cloudy and you can't
see through the clouds to actually see
what you want to see so i'm going to
stay up till probably around 2 or 3 a.m
today
anyway because you know it might come
clear
fingers crossed it might not it's
probably more likely that it won't
but also you know i need to shift my
body clock to working night
anyway so if it doesn't come clear and
we don't actually observe then i'm
probably going to watch netflix's
bridgeton which i'm very excited for and
having a nice face and pleasant hair is
not
an accomplishment do you know what is an
accomplishment attending
university and this is really annoying
that it's wet because you don't get this
time back you don't get to make it up on
a clear night you get allocated the
dates you get given and if
it's bad weather and you can't do
observations then
sort of tough fingers crossed though for
tomorrow night and saturday
and sunday and hopefully we get
something then so if we can
actually open the telescope up at some
point this weekend we're hoping to
observe
30 galaxies with bars bars are these
long
structures of stars and gas in flat disc
galaxies they're closely related to the
sort of big beautiful spiral shapes you
see
but not all spiral galaxies have bars
and the big question is you know
how does having a bar actually affect a
galaxy how does it change how the galaxy
evolves now one thing astronomers
realized pretty early on is that a
higher proportion of bard galaxies are
redder in color than those without bars
and red colours means
more older cooler stars and not any of
the sort of brand
newly formed young hotter stars which
means that these red galaxies are
they've been dubbed dead right they're
kind of like a dormant volcano they've
stopped
actively making more stars the question
is why so is the bar somehow responsible
for that
drop in star formation maybe the bar
funnels
gas away from the outskirts from the gas
that can be used to make
more stars or does some other process
stop stars from forming
and then it makes it easier for a bar to
form and that's why we see so many of
them
in red galaxies now there's been lots of
work done
on this already but the jury's still out
on
which one is actually going on there's
bits of evidence for
that supports both ideas but not enough
to sort of concretely say
this is what's going on in the majority
of these galaxies so with the
observations that we're doing of these
30 galaxies some with
very strong bars some with a little bit
weaker bars and some with no bars is a
control sample
we're going to try and see if we can
spot any of that gas
flowing along the bar being funneled
away from the outskirts of the galaxy
where lots of stars would be forming
and into the middle where it gets heated
if it's hot it can't actually form more
stars which is a little bit of a
contradiction i'll give you that but
it's because you need cold gas to make
stars because if the gas has too much
energy it's too hot it's moving around
too much
then gravity is not going to have any
effects on it when it tries to pull it
together to collapse into a star
so if it's too hot you're not going to
be able to use it to make more stars so
if we can find evidence for gas
flowing along the bar in these galaxies
i
being funneled to the center where it
will essentially then be useful and
can't be used to make
more stars then that would be the
smoking gun to say
bars are stopping stars from forming in
galaxies and we're going to compare what
we find for the strongest of bars the
weakest of bars
and those galaxies with no bars as well
so we can work out what is actually
going
on but i'm sure a lot of you are
thinking how in the universe do you even
manage to spot gas flowing along a bar
well this is the clever bit because the
gas in galaxies is also surrounded by
stars that are giving off
a lot of light and a lot of energy and
if that energy impacts on that gas it
can actually cause it
to glow in different elements so
hydrogen or oxygen or nitrogen glow
with a very different and specific color
or wavelength of light so you see lots
of these specific colors or wavelengths
in what we call the spectrum of a galaxy
so if you take the light from a galaxy
and split it through a prism
into its component wavelengths and then
you make a trace for
how much of each color or wavelength do
you actually get you see these big
spikes
which are due to the gas in a galaxy
glowing
so we have this like fingerprint of
light that comes from just the gas
in a galaxy and you can compare that to
the fingerprint of light that you get
from stars instead and from the overall
light in a galaxy
now the overall light in a galaxy will
have what we call
a red shift right this is due to the
fact that the universe is
expanding so because the universe is
expanding it looks
to us from our perspective on earth as
if that galaxy is moving away from us
and we
are stationary but in reality the space
between those two galaxies
is stretching so the light from that
galaxy gets
stretched on its way to us and the
amount that it's been stretched can tell
us how far away that galaxy is
as well but that oh that galaxy overall
will have what we call a systemic
redshift this overall shift in the light
because it appears to us
that the galaxy is moving now if the gas
is moving separately to that galaxy
it will have a different amount
of shift so if you can measure the
difference in the amount of shift that
the gases fingerprint has compared to
the star's fingerprint or the overall
fingerprint of light that you get
from a galaxy then you can work out how
fast that gas is moving
and also in which direction as well
considering which direction the shift
happens if it's a red shift a longer
wavelength or a blue shift
to shorter wavelengths and so this is
how we can tell
that the gas might be being funneled
along
the bar assuming that we get some good
weather
in at least the next three nights if not
tonight on what was supposed to be our
first night
and that's what we're hoping to measure
and then analyze in the data that we get
over the next few weeks
now everything i've just described to
you we also had to describe it to the
panel that decides who gets time
on the telescopes we had to do this in
an application about six months ago
essentially to convince the panel that
our science was worthwhile
doing and that we thought it through we
knew what we were going to do with the
telescope and knew what we were trying
to detect
and knew what we were trying to test in
terms of a science hypothesis
too so thankfully they gave us the time
and now
here we are not you know actually at the
observatory on a mountaintop but
all of us in our spare rooms in oxford
just to give you an idea of what it
would have looked like if we could have
gone uh this is me back in 2014 on my
very first
observing trip to this observatory the
rocket de la muchachos observatory
uh in la palma in the canary islands and
i was using the exact same telescope
we'll be using tonight the isaac newton
telescope the i
n t and i absolutely loved
that trip and it is kind of weird not
being there but it's
also incredibly cool
that you know we can type in commands on
our machines here in oxford
i know that a telescope halfway around
the world
will move to look at galaxies billions
of light years away
right all right it is now friday
at well 26 ish um
yeah i'm wearing the same jumpers
yesterday it's locked down i'm not going
to do more washing than necessary at the
minute so just just give me this one
um we were hopeful that we'd be open
tonight we'd be able to be able to open
the telescope dome because
it sort of looked like it had stopped
actually snowing it wasn't raining it
was snowing
today up until the mountain because it
was so cold it turns out uh it stopped
around about
three four o'clock this afternoon ish
um and when that happens you know you
think okay well if the temperature drops
but it stopped snowing that could cause
the the clouds to sort of drop and then
on the top of the mountain you'd at
least be above the clouds and you'd be
able to
observe but that hasn't happened it
started snowing
again um and we've now
heard from the person who's actually at
the observatory they like to support
astronomer
on site using one there at a time for
the code restrictions everything
um and they don't think it's gonna be
possible to open the telescope tonight
they actually say that the conditions
are worse than they were yesterday and
have been in previous days where it's
been pretty bad
there's also a weather warning out full
of palmer the canary islands tomorrow
for very heavy rain
which is during the day so you know
maybe we could open the telescope at
night time
but they've said that they are actually
very very doubtful that
not only will we not be able to open the
telescope tonight
but probably not saturday or sunday
either
which is not great because
i mean that would mean no data and
no data is not something that i even
want to
consider at this point in time because
you know we did all the application you
know we wrote that big application to
get time
and if you get rained or snowed off
in this case you don't get reallocated
time that's it that was your chance and
never mind try again next year which is
not something you want to do you know
the person that's been leading this is
my phd student we want him to get data
so that he can finish
his phd up which has already been you
know uh disrupted by that pandemic
so it's not been very lucky uh
to be honest so i'm trying to hold out
hope
that you know it will come clear
miraculously maybe we'll even be able to
get a couple of hours
in here or there maybe with breaks in
the clouds but
yeah fingers crossed everybody so
just had some very frustrating news from
the people who are actually
at the telescope it's currently saturday
afternoon like three o'clock or
something
and they've said that that we are not
going to open the telescope dome tonight
to observe it is
so cold on top of the mountain that
after all the snow has fallen
the telescope dome has frozen shut so
even if it does clear up tonight they're
not even gonna attempt to even open
the dome so we've come out on a walk
because it's gonna be a good idea to
walk out the frustration at the minute
because it's just so
frustrating that yeah all right we're
not getting any data first of all
but you know fingers crossed for
tomorrow anyway we do get some data
maybe we can open then
weather will have to drastically change
i'm also just really frustrated that i
wanted to show you
like what a realistic night was like for
observing and remote observing during a
pandemic um
i know i can't and the funny thing is
though like this is actually probably
the most
realistic version of events i could give
you because the amount of times that
you know you do get nights when you want
to observe and it turns out
that the weather is terrible and you
can't open so
it is kind of realistic you know we were
tweeting about it yesterday people were
saying you know
they had eight nights given to them on a
telescope in chile and they'd gone out
over there and they'd ended up you know
like
three hours or something they opened the
dome for and there's a whole eight night
so
it happens it's just really really
annoying i wish it was snowing here
rather than snowing in the farmer but
it's not it's just
a bit gray and a bit dreary
well i'm starting to feel like a broken
record now because surprise surprise
it's still snowing in la palma and
it's not even half for on sunday and
we've already heard from the support
astronomer that
they won't be opening the telescope
tonight and we won't be getting any data
essentially that
bad weather procedures are enforced you
know like all the roads up to the
observatory shut because it's that bad
this is like the tail end of storm
philomena the one that's like brought
40 50 centimeters of snow to madrid for
the first time in like 50 years this is
what they're getting the back end of
so i mean i shouldn't be surprised
really but it
i mean i'm just trying to keep my
spirits up but i'm just laughing at like
i remember there was an april fool's
paper
last year there was like if you ever
want to reduce drought somewhere then
give me
telescope time i feel like i'm the
equivalent now
but with snow because i remember one of
the first times i ever went to mauna kea
to observe you know the telescopes on
the top of
hawaii right in the big island in hawaii
and the first time i went up there on my
last night observing
it snowed and we nearly got trapped over
the top of the telescope because it came
down
so thick and heavy overnight you know we
were already up at the telescope
observing and we had to shut around
midnight and then you know put the ice
chains on the car to try and drive back
down it was
it was crazy so apparently give me
observing time on a telescope and
also i mean all jokes aside though uh
we're not gonna get any data now from
this trip it's it doesn't mean that
science won't happen it just means this
bit of science won't happen
and this bit of science was gonna be
part of our phd student's thesis
which is really really frustrating so i
mean i guess i shouldn't write off the
night yet i mean
you never know right it could
come clear and we could have
even just a little bit of data by
tomorrow morning even
just observed one galaxy that would be
awesome
i hope future becky has some good news
for you
in the morning tomorrow nope
i don't know maybe i was a bit naive for
holding on to hope
that maybe we would be able to open the
telescope you know there was just some
small part of me that thought that we'd
get at least
an hour or two of observations or
something
but you know when the dome's frozen
shirt the dome is frozen shut
i really wanted to show you guys though
like what data that comes fresh off the
telescope actually looks like
so i dug into all of my external hard
drives and found the data that we took
back in 2014. now
these aren't bad galaxies these are
actually um what we call agn so they're
galaxies with growing black holes
but still we were still taking the exact
same thing we were taking a spectra
which is where you put the slit
along the galaxy and then you end up
with something that looks like
this when it comes straight fresh off
the telescope okay so what you're seeing
here this bright line
down the middle is the actual galaxy
so the way you can think of this because
it is an image but it's an image of a
spectra where you've split the light
into its component wavelength so along
here down i guess what you could call
the y-axis
is wavelengths and then the x-axis here
is sort of like
space across the sky it's like we've
taken everything in the slit and sort of
condensed it into
one dimension and so this bright stripe
down the center is good because we've
centered the telescope on the galaxy
great
but then you might be wondering what are
these bright lines that go across
the image now they're across the entire
space
of the image and they appear at these
very specific
wavelengths and so that is actually
emission from gas in
our own atmosphere this is what we call
sky
lines they are really annoying if you're
an astronomer because they appear
in all of your observations and so you
have to be very careful to
remove them from all of your
observations as well it's essentially
like a sky
glow like light that's refracted around
the atmosphere like
sunlight can still hit into gas in our
atmosphere at night time and cause
those uh gas elements to glow with their
very specific colors or wavelengths
which is why we only see them
at very specific sort of stripes
in wavelength across these images it's a
little bit too faint
for you to see with your naked eye but
you know
astrophotography and telescopes
obviously pick out nice and easily and
sometimes you even can
see the specific colors or wavelengths
of light that the
the gas in the atmosphere is giving off
but what we do when we're observing
obviously is we want to know whether
we're actually
getting enough signal from the galaxy to
do the science
that we want to do now what we'd usually
do is take an image like this or a
spectra like this
and we would clean it up we'd remove all
the sources of noise that we
possibly know of including yes the sky
noise but also
noise in the detector itself just from
like warm
electronics and things like that but we
don't always have
you know the time or even the brain
capacity when you're working nights
to do that kind of in detailed level of
cleanup so what we usually do
if we'd been observing this weekend and
we'd actually got data we would have
been sort of doing a very
sort of quick rough sort of like dirty
reduction
of the data sort of like quickly
cleaning up these skylines so
essentially what we would have done
is we would have taken um sort of like a
strip
of the spectra down here which just
contained the sky there will be some
diffuse galaxy light that we can't see
yet that will have like moved across the
image but mostly
so if you take a strip over here it will
just contain sky and we'll take it off
this middle bit which contains sky and
galaxy so we'll just be left
with galaxy and if you do that i sort of
wrote you know a really quick
little function that can do that then
you end up with something that looks um
like this
right and so what you can see is this is
wavelength now on the x-axis
but we've not calibrated it yet in terms
of what wavelength or color it actually
is so we've just got it in terms of
pixels
and then we've sort of got the number of
photons that we detected in each pixel
at the number of counts
and you can see that what we're
detecting now is just galaxy there's big
feature here is actually emission from
hydrogen and in this case it's very
broad because what we're looking at here
is a growing black hole that's got
hydrogen spiraling around it so you've
got some that's redshifted and some
that's blue shifted and so it's not this
very sort of thin peak it's this nice
broad peak
so if we did actually get data of the
bard galaxies we'd be looking for
something similar but it would be across
all of the emission of various different
gases hydrogen oxygen nitrogen
everything and we'd look for actually
sort of an overall shift
in comparison to sort of like the
overall background galaxy light which in
this case is still
very noisy because we haven't done a
very tiny reduction of cleaning up of
the data we've just done it very
roughly doing that sort of subtraction
of the bit of the spectrum that just has
sky and the bit of the spectrum that has
galaxy
and sky but hopefully with that you can
see you know that's the kind of data
that we're working with we're working
with these sort of
two meter sized telescopes these
professional telescopes
and that would have been the kind of
data that we would have been reducing
over the next couple of
weeks and analyzing and using it to test
our hypothesis but instead
we will probably be putting in another
application in about two months time the
march deadline
for the latter half of this year to do
the same experiment but possibly with
different galaxies that are visible
maybe september time
rather than january time and fingers
crossed
that you know the panel that looks at
these applications thinks our science is
is a good enough thing to test like the
previous panel did
and they awarded time again later in
fingers crossed all domes on the
telescopes have frozen shot
so even if it is clear tonight which
isn't because it's still snowing
apparently
um we can't open the telescope so i have
made myself a hot chocolate
we've lit fire just trying to make
myself feel better because at the minute
very frustrated because we're not
getting any data